do not merge yet, waiting on additions to TFP master (#39)
rstudio/tensorflow-blog: _posts/2019-05-24-varying-slopes/varying_slopes.Rmd

---
title: "Hierarchical partial pooling, continued: Varying slopes models with TensorFlow Probability"
description: > 

>    This post builds on our recent introduction to multi-level modeling with tfprobability, the R wrapper to TensorFlow Probability. We show how to pool not just mean values ("intercepts"), but also relationships ("slopes"), thus enabling models to learn from data in an even broader way. Again, we use an example from Richard McElreath's "Statistical Rethinking"; and again, terminology as well as the way we present this topic are largely owed to this book.

Reviewer: I think you can cut the second `and again,` in this paragraph and replace it with "the", perhaps?

author:
  - name: Sigrid Keydana
    affiliation: RStudio
    affiliation_url: https://www.rstudio.com/
slug: keydana2019cafes
date: 05-24-2019
categories:
  - Probability and statistics 
  - Introductions
output:
  distill::distill_article:
    self_contained: false
preview: images/thumb.png
---

```{r setup, include=FALSE}
knitr::opts_chunk$set(echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE)
```

> In a previous post, we showed how to use [tfprobability](https://rstudio.github.io/tfprobability/) -- the R interface to TensorFlow Probability -- to build a _multilevel_, or  _partial pooling_, model of tadpole survival in differently sized (and thus, differing in inhabitant number) tanks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a [previous post](https://blogs.rstudio.com/tensorflow/posts/2019-01-08-getting-started-with-tf-probability/), we showed how to use [tfprobability](https://rstudio.github.io/tfprobability/) -- the R interface to TensorFlow Probability -- to build a _multilevel_, or  _partial pooling_ model of tadpole survival in differently sized (and thus, differing in inhabitant number) tanks.
```

> A completely _pooled_ model would have resulted in a global estimate of survival count, irrespective of tank; an _unpooled_ model would have learned to predict survival count for each tank separately. The former approach does not take into account different circumstances; the latter does not make use of common information. (Also, it clearly has no predictive use unless we want to make predictions for the very same entities we used to train the model.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A completely _pooled_ model would have resulted in a global estimate of survival count, irrespective of tank, while an _unpooled_ model would have learned to predict survival count for each tank separately. The former approach does not take into account different circumstances; the latter does not make use of common information. (Also, it clearly has no predictive use unless we want to make predictions for the very same entities we used to train the model.)
```

In contrast, a _partially pooled_ model lets you make predictions for the familiar, as well as new entities: Just use the appropriate prior.

Assuming we _are_ in fact interested in the same entities -- why would we want to apply partial pooling?
For the same reasons so much effort in machine learning goes into devising regularization mechanisms.

> We don't want to overfit too much to actual measurements, be they related to the same entity or a class of entities. If I want to predict my heart rate as I wake up next morning, based on a single measurement I'm taking now (let's say it's evening and I'm frantically typing a blog post), I better take into account some facts about heart rate behavior in general (instead of just projecting into the future the exact value measured right now).

Reviewer: Have this paragraph with the preceding line.

Reviewer: > If I want to predict my heart rate as I wake up next morning, based on a single measurement I'm taking now (let's say it's evening and I'm frantically typing a blog post), I better take into account some facts about heart rate behavior in general (instead of just projecting into the future the exact value measured right now).

I like this example, and I wonder if it would help to add some common terminology in here to help people make connections (e.g. _extrapolation_ etc).

Author: 1) you mean the 2 single-line ones go together?
2) do you have a suggestion?

Reviewer: I kind of disagree with my own comment now, since you expand on it later!

Author: haha I'm relieved :-) ... because I don't use "extrapolate", but "project" should convey something similar, right :-)

> In the tadpole example, this means we expect generalization to work better for tanks with many inhabitants, compared to more solitary environments. For the latter ones, we better take a peek at survival rates from other tanks, to supplement the sparse idiosyncratic information available. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the tadpole example, this means we expect generalization to work better for tanks with many inhabitants, compared to more solitary environments. For the latter ones, we better take a peek at survival rates from other tanks, to supplement the sparse, idiosyncratic information available. 
```

Or using the technical term, in the latter case we hope for the model to _shrink_ its estimates toward the overall mean more noticeably than in the former.

> This type of information sharing is already very useful, but it gets better. The tadpole model is a _varying intercepts_ model, as McElreath calls it (or _random intercepts_, as it is sometimes -- confusingly -- called ^[cf. [the Wikipedia article on multilevel models](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multilevel_model) for a collection of terms encountered when dealing with this subject, and e.g. [Gelman's](https://statmodeling.stat.columbia.edu/2005/01/25/why_i_dont_use/) dissection of various ways _random effects_ are defined]) -- _intercepts_ referring to the way we make predictions for entities (here: tanks), with no predictor variables present. So if we can pool information about intercepts, why not pool information about _slopes_ as well? This will allow us to, in addition, make use of _relationships_ between variables learnt on different entities in the training set.

Reviewer: > This will allow us to, in addition, make use of _relationships_ between variables learnt on different entities in the training set.

I'm not totally sure what "learnt" refers to hear (the variables examined in the different training sets?) If this is a common term that I just don't know (very possible), feel free to totally ignore.

> So as you might have guessed by now, _varying slopes_ (or _random slopes_, if you will) is the topic of today's post. Again, we take up an example from McElreath's book, and show how to accomplish the same thing with `tfprobability`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So, as you might have guessed by now, _varying slopes_ (or _random slopes_, if you will) is the topic of today's post. Again, we take up an example from McElreath's book, and show how to accomplish the same thing with `tfprobability`.
```

## Coffee, please

> Unlike the tadpole case, this time we work with simulated data. This is the data McElreath uses to introduce the _varying slopes_ modeling technique; he then goes on and applies it to one of the book's most featured datasets, the _pro-social_ (or indifferent, rather!) chimpanzees. For today, we stay with the simulated data for two reasons: First, the subject matter per se is non-trivial enough; and second, we want to keep careful track of what our model does, and whether its output is sufficiently close to the results McElreath obtained from _Stan_ ^[We won't overload this post by explicitly comparing results here, but we did that when writing the code.]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unlike the tadpole case, this time we work with simulated data. This is the data McElreath uses to introduce the _varying slopes_ modeling technique; he then goes on and applies it to one of the book's most featured datasets, the _pro-social_ (or indifferent, rather!) chimpanzees. For today, we'll stay with the simulated data for two reasons: First, the subject matter per se is non-trivial enough; and second, we want to keep careful track of what our model does, and whether its output is sufficiently close to the results McElreath obtained from _Stan_ ^[We won't overload this post by explicitly comparing results here, but we did that when writing the code.]. 
```

So, the scenario is this. ^[Disclaimer: We have not verified whether this is an adequate model of the world, but it really doesn't matter either.] Cafés vary in how popular they are. In a popular café, when you order coffee, you're likely to _wait_. In a less popular café, you'll likely be served much faster. That's one thing.
Second, all cafés tend to be more crowded in the mornings than in the afternoons. Thus in the morning, you'll wait longer than in the afternoon -- this goes for the popular as well as the less popular cafés.

> In terms of intercepts and slopes, we can picture the morning waits as intercepts, and the resultant afternoon waits as arising due to the slopes of the lines joining each morning and afternoon wait, respectively.

Reviewer: Is there a visual here? I ask mainly because "lines" could also refer to lines in which people are waiting; so, it might be helpful to see a generalized example chart.

> So when we partially-pool _intercepts_, we have one "intercept prior" (itself constrained by a prior, of course), and a set of café-specific intercepts that will vary around it. When we partially-pool _slopes_, we have a "slope prior" reflecting the overall relationship between morning and afternoon waits, and a set of café-specific slopes reflecting the individual relationships. Cognitively, that means that if you have never been to the _Café Gerbeaud_ in Budapest but have been to cafés before, you might have a less-than-uninformed idea about how long you are going to wait; it also means that if you normally get your coffee in your favorite corner café in the mornings, and now you pass by there in the afternoon, you have an approximate idea how long it's going to take (namely, fewer minutes than in the mornings).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So when we partially-pool _intercepts_, we have one "intercept prior" (itself constrained by a prior, of course), and a set of café-specific intercepts that will vary around it. When we partially-pool _slopes_, we have a "slope prior" reflecting the overall relationship between morning and afternoon waits, and a set of café-specific slopes reflecting the individual relationships. Cognitively, that means that if you have never been to the _Café Gerbeaud_ in Budapest but have been to cafés before, you might have a less-than-uninformed idea about how long you are going to wait. This also means that if you normally get your coffee in your favorite corner café in the mornings, and now you pass by there in the afternoon, you have an approximate idea how long it's going to take (namely, fewer minutes than in the mornings).
```

Reviewer: ^^ all I did here was separate the last sentence out into two sentences, sometimes the diff doesn't show the change very well.

> So is that all? Actually, no. In our scenario, intercepts and slopes are related. If, at a less popular café, I always get my coffee before two minutes have passed, there is little room for improvement. At a highly popular café though, if it could easily take ten minutes in the mornings, then there is quite some potential for decrease in waiting time in the afternoon. So in my prediction for this afternoon's waiting time, I should factor in this interaction effect. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So is that all? Actually, no. In our scenario, intercepts and slopes are related. If, at a less popular café, I always get my coffee before two minutes have passed, there is little room for improvement. At a highly popular café though, if it could easily take ten minutes in the mornings, then there is potential to decrease in waiting time in the afternoon. So, in my prediction for this afternoon's waiting time, I should factor in this interaction effect. 
```

Before we code the model, let's quickly get library loading out of the way. Importantly, again just like in the previous post, we need to install a `master` build of TensorFlow Probability, as we're making use of very new features not yet available in the current release version. The same goes for the R packages `tensorflow` and `tfprobability`: Please install the respective development versions from github. 

```{r}
devtools::install_github("rstudio/tensorflow")
devtools::install_github("rstudio/tfprobability")

# this will install the latest nightlies of TensorFlow as well as TensorFlow Probability
tensorflow::install_tensorflow(version = "nightly")

library(tensorflow)
tf$compat$v1$enable_v2_behavior()

library(tfprobability)

library(tidyverse)
library(zeallot)
library(abind)
library(gridExtra)
library(HDInterval)
library(ellipse)
```

> Now here is the model definition. We'll go through it step by step in an instant.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, here is the model definition. We'll go through it step by step in an instant.
```

        # b, the prior mean for the slopes
        tfd_sample_distribution(tfd_normal(loc = -1, scale = 0.5), sample_shape = 1),
        # a, the prior mean for the intercepts
        tfd_sample_distribution(tfd_normal(loc = 5, scale = 2), sample_shape = 1), 
        # mvn, multivariate distribution of intercepts and slopes
        # shape: batch size, 20, 2
        function(a,b,sigma_cafe,sigma,chol_rho) 
          tfd_sample_distribution(
            tfd_multivariate_normal_tri_l(
              loc = tf$concat(list(a,b), axis = -1L),
              scale_tril = tf$linalg$LinearOperatorDiag(sigma_cafe)$matmul(chol_rho)),
            sample_shape = n_cafes),
        # waiting time
        # shape should be batch size, 200
        function(mvn, a, b, sigma_cafe, sigma)
          tfd_independent(
            # need to pull out the correct cafe_id in the middle column
            tfd_normal(
              loc = (tf$gather(mvn[ , , 1], cafe_id, axis = -1L) +
                       tf$gather(mvn[ , , 2], cafe_id, axis = -1L) * afternoon), 
              scale=sigma),  # Shape [batch,  1]
        reinterpreted_batch_ndims=1
        )
    )
  )
}
```

> The first five distributions are priors. First,

Reviewer: I think the "First," here should go with the rest of the sentence, which can either be above or below the code chunk that follows.

Reviewer: Splitting them works in other places where the sentence is a bit more evenly broken up.

Author: oh yeah I see

One short note about the `input_output_cholesky` parameter in the definition of the LKJ. This is a pure performance optimization, allowing for more efficient construction of the multivariate normal that makes use of the LKJ's output a few lines later.

The next distribution in line

```{r}
# sigma, prior variance for the waiting time
tfd_sample_distribution(tfd_exponential(rate = 1), sample_shape = 1)
```

is the prior for the variance of the waiting time, the very last distribution in the list.

Next is the prior distribution of variances for the intercepts and slopes. This prior is the same for both cases, but we specify a `sample_shape` of 2 to get two individual samples.

```{r}
# sigma_cafe, prior of variances for intercepts and slopes (vector of 2)
tfd_sample_distribution(tfd_exponential(rate = 1), sample_shape = 2)
```

Now that we have the respective prior variances, we move on to the prior means. Both are normal distributions.

```{r}
# b, the prior mean for the slopes
tfd_sample_distribution(tfd_normal(loc = -1, scale = 0.5), sample_shape = 1)
```

```{r}
# a, the prior mean for the intercepts
tfd_sample_distribution(tfd_normal(loc = 5, scale = 2), sample_shape = 1)
```

> On to the heart of the model, where the partial pooling happens. We are going to construct partially pooled intercepts and slopes for all of the cafés. Like we said above, intercepts and slopes are not independent; they interact. Thus, we need to use a multivariate normal distribution. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On to the heart of the model, where the partial pooling happens. We are going to construct partially-pooled intercepts and slopes for all of the cafés. Like we said above, intercepts and slopes are not independent; they interact. Thus, we need to use a multivariate normal distribution. 
```

  # rho 1:4
  as.double(rhat[[1]] %>% tf$reshape(list(4L))),
  # sigma
  as.double(rhat[[2]]),  
  # sigma_cafe 1:2
  as.double(rhat[[3]][1]),    
  as.double(rhat[[3]][2]), 
  # b
  as.double(rhat[[4]]),  
  # a
  as.double(rhat[[5]]),  
  # mvn 10:49
  as.double(rhat[[6]] %>% tf$reshape(list(40L)))
  ) 

```

### Trace plots

How well do the chains mix?

```{r}
prep_tibble <- function(samples) {
  as_tibble(samples, .name_repair = ~ c("chain_1", "chain_2", "chain_3", "chain_4")) %>% 
    add_column(sample = 1:n_steps) %>%
    gather(key = "chain", value = "value", -sample)
}

plot_trace <- function(samples) {
  prep_tibble(samples) %>% 
    ggplot(aes(x = sample, y = value, color = chain)) +
    geom_line() + 
    theme_light() +
    theme(legend.position = "none",
          axis.title = element_blank(),
          axis.text = element_blank(),
          axis.ticks = element_blank())
}

plot_traces <- function(sample_array, num_params) {
  plots <- purrr::map(1:num_params, ~ plot_trace(sample_array[ , , .x]))
  do.call(grid.arrange, plots)
}

plot_traces(samples, 49)
```

```{r, eval=TRUE, echo=FALSE, layout="l-body-outset"}
knitr::include_graphics("images/trace.png")
```

> Awesome! (The first two parameters of `rho`, the cholesky factor of the correlation matrix, need to stay fixed at 1 and 0, respectively.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Awesome! (The first two parameters of `rho`, the Cholesky factor of the correlation matrix, need to stay fixed at 1 and 0, respectively.)
```

> Now to some summary statistics on the posteriors of the parameters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, on to some summary statistics on the posteriors of the parameters.
```

33 b_cafe_12    -1.17  0.259  -1.65  -0.670   62.5   1.03
34 a_cafe_13     3.88  0.201   3.50   4.29    62.2   1.02
35 b_cafe_13    -1.81  0.270  -2.30  -1.29    48.3   1.03
36 a_cafe_14     3.19  0.212   2.82   3.61    65.9   1.07
37 b_cafe_14    -0.961 0.278  -1.49  -0.401   49.9   1.06
38 a_cafe_15     4.46  0.212   4.08   4.91    62.0   1.09
39 b_cafe_15    -2.20  0.290  -2.72  -1.59    47.8   1.11
40 a_cafe_16     3.41  0.193   3.02   3.78    62.7   1.02
41 b_cafe_16    -1.07  0.253  -1.54  -0.567   48.5   1.05
42 a_cafe_17     4.22  0.201   3.82   4.60    58.7   1.01
43 b_cafe_17    -1.24  0.273  -1.74  -0.703   43.8   1.01
44 a_cafe_18     5.77  0.210   5.34   6.18    66.0   1.02
45 b_cafe_18    -1.05  0.284  -1.61  -0.511   49.8   1.02
46 a_cafe_19     3.23  0.203   2.88   3.65    52.7   1.02
47 b_cafe_19    -0.232 0.276  -0.808  0.243   45.2   1.01
48 a_cafe_20     3.74  0.212   3.35   4.21    48.2   1.04
49 b_cafe_20    -1.09  0.281  -1.58  -0.506   36.5   1.05
```

So what do we have? If you run this "live", for the rows `a_cafe_n` resp. `b_cafe_n`, you see a nice alternation of white and red coloring: For all cafés, the inferred slopes are negative.

> The inferred slope prior (`b`) is around -1.14, which is not too far off from the value we used for sampling: 1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

The inferred slope prior (`b`) is around -1.14, which is not too far off from the value we used for sampling: 1.
```

Author: sorry I fail to see the difference?

Reviewer: I added a blank line above it, since the other paragraphs were separated that way.

Author: ah I see, thanks!
